# What is a smart contract?

A smart contract is a piece of code deployed on a blockchain, a decentralized network of servers. By paying a price, people can trigger a smart contract, running the code in it, like how a programmer runs a program. The cost of running this program is determined by how complicated the operations are.<br/><br/>
In my opinion, the smart contract can be seen as a natural progression of the original blockchain - aka the value transfer ledger. On top of this network of accounts, a smart contract adds a layer of sophistication on how to distribute funds, making new, programmable rules to a blockchain. This is why some people refer Ethereum as a <a href="https://consensys.net/blog/news/programmable-blockchains-in-context-ethereum-smart-contracts-and-the-world-computer/">world computer</a>, where anyone anywheree can harness the computing power of the network and get the same result, albeit with a small cost. Among all smart contract languages, Solidity is the most dominant programming language for EVM blockchains.<br/><br/>
On the Ethereum blockchain, a smart contract is given an address just like any other accounts. Unlike normal accounts, funds directed to this address will be channeled through the contract code, running through the logic to determine what to do with the amount. For example, a contract to divest tokens can distribute tokens evenly to each developer's account; A DeFi vault contract can calculate the amount of fees payable to a liquidity provider, and proceed with paying those accounts. References to outside world can be obtained from various sources, [Chainlink Oracles](https://data.chain.link/ethereum/mainnet/crypto-usd/eth-usd) being an example of how token prices can be obtained.
<br/><br/>
<h3>How is the contract cost determined?</h3>
At deployment, the smart contract code will be processed by the compiler into low level machine instructions. These instructions, resembling assembly language, will determine the overall running cost (gas price) a user pay when running a smart contract. Respective amounts for each operation can be found <a href="https://github.com/crytic/evm-opcodes">here</a>. In general, interacting with the blockchain (reading account balances, saving data) cost more gas, while simple logical operations (addition, jumping) is relatively cheap. <a href="https://www.cs.toronto.edu/~fanl/papers/gas-brain21.pdf">Gas-saving techniques</a> and <a href="https://medium.com/joyso/solidity-save-gas-in-smart-contract-3d9f20626ea4">coding habits</a> are something that helps to optimize the gas consumption of your contract, but in general, the more loops and logic a contract has, the more expensive it is to run.
<br/><br/>
<h3>At run time</h3>
At run time, a person interacts with a smart contract and attach a small amount of ETH as gas fees. This request is broadcasted and picked up by a miner, who is responsible for producing new blocks. To collect the gas fee, the miner "mines" the transaction, runs the code in the smart contract, and write the result to the blockchain if the block is accepted. Due to the random nature of block production, any miner could pick up your transaction request, therefore making bribing and miner collusion nearly impossible. However, this could be changed in the future as Ethereum migrates to the Proof-of-Stake consensus mechanism.
